Story Recapped here. Today, I’m going to explain
a drama, sci-fi, thriller film called, “Primer.”
Spoilers ahead! Watch out and take care.
It all starts with a voice recorder
narration by a man coming from the future.
He tells a story of two meticulous, methodical,
educated yet ambiguous friends who accidentally
discover a scientific breakthrough that is still
unknown — or perhaps not yet revealed to man.
It begins with an argument among four science
engineers who are planning on a side project
for an attempt to create a device to counter the
effects of gravity. The plan is complicated. All
of them work day jobs. They work 50 hours a week
with an average salary grade they can depend on.
They argue on how much time each should devote,
not to mention the funds to proceed with the plan.
As the tension grows, they are less likely
to come up with a solution. After spending
considerable time squabbling, only Abe and
Aaron are left determined to take the challenge.
Abe, with a cautious and controlling personality,
and Aaron, a meddlesome and impulsive kind of guy,
begin to plan out their counter measurements
in dealing with the adversities.
Despite difficulties, they begin their
research and experiment in Aaron’s garage.
After identifying the necessary components
for the project, due to financial inadequacy,
they chop off parts from existing appliances
and take anything that is needed from their
surroundings — thus creating a legitimate
particle accelerator device, a device that
uses electromagnetic fields to propel charged
particles at very high speeds and energies,
smashing the charged particles into its subatomic
state. The only thing left now is to acquire a
palladium element. It is necessary for their
main approach to discard the coolant bath for
the superconductors because the palladium element
can withstand heat up to 2,830 degrees Fahrenheit
without altering its chemical property and form.
Due to this reason, they take the catalytic
converter from Abe’s car which contains a small
amount of palladium necessary for their invention.
Then, they take it to a machine shop to
fabricate a palladium steel sheet covering.
After several weeks of meticulously placing
all the parts together, they successfully
create the prototype and are finally ready
to put the particle accelerator to the test.
During the test, they place a
nesting egg doll inside the machine,
set up the necessary scale, load
0.5 liters of Argon to the intake,
and switch the device on. At first, the
machine seems stable; however, as they
increase the electromagnetic field’s power, the
machine judders irregularly and short-circuits.
They realize that they blew the batteries. After
a failed attempt, they decide to call it a day.
The next day, Abe wakes up in a particularly
odd manner, seemingly confused about the present
time. Aaron calls to meet up with him, still
disoriented, Abe answers his call. After a
few seconds, Aaron picks him up to bring him back
to his garage for a surprise. Inside the garage,
Aaron tells Abe that he finally figured out how to
stabilize the machine. Aaron installs a regulator
to control the intensity of the electromagnetic
field as he shows Abe how to operate the machine
by gradually feeding power until it reaches its
maximum amplitude. As Abe shows his astonishment,
Aaron further explains that by the time the
machine reaches its equilibrium, it creates
enough source of energy to sustain its power on
its own just as he pulls out all the batteries.
The discovery leads to another scientific dilemma.
They discuss each of their hypotheses. After
several hours of discourse, both seem unable to
agree on a certain conclusion. However, what they
both agree on is to keep it to themselves
first until further evidence is gathered.
In one event, Thomas Granger, father
of Abe’s girlfriend, shows up as their
last best hope of funding. Abe takes the task of
quantifying and explaining the device to Granger.
As weeks become months, their enthusiasm becomes
a slower realization that they are deep in debts.
Then one significant and fateful encounter, Abe
approaches Aaron who is sitting on a bench at the
park, taking notes in his notebook. Aaron is
suspiciously wearing an unobtrusive earpiece.
He asks Abe about his whereabouts because
he wasn’t able to reach him all morning.
Abe strangely answers that he isn’t around. Aaron
doesn’t seem to mind his suspicious response.
Then Abe suddenly gets emotional and starts to
talk about their long relationship as a friend.
Acting suspicious, he then
presented a proposition to Aaron,
telling him to follow everything exactly as he
says all throughout the day, then in return,
he will show him the most important thing
that any living organism has ever witnessed.
Back in the garage, Abe shows Aaron the nesting
egg doll, enveloped with protein buildup secreted
by an Aspergillus Ticor fungus, that he made
several experiments with the device. Then he
brings Aaron to a Biologist to explain how they
speed up the buildup processes of proteins in
laboratories. The Biologist illustrates how
they use a centrifuge to spin the fungus
around for a couple of thousand rotations
in a day as the Biologist explains that it
takes about a month to finally see a small
buildup. Then Abe further explains that the
nesting doll that has accumulated the amount
of buildup for five days inside their machine,
tantamounts to the amount of buildup for six years
given normal conditions. Seeing Aaron’s confusion,
Abe decides to bring him back to the garage
and shows him the actual experiment instead.
First, he sets a mechanical watch at 6 P.M, then
he places it in the machine. After 6 minutes,
they take the watch out, and as they calculate,
the watch’s time advances by 1,347 minutes. Abe
does the same experiment for a digital watch, and
it shows identical results. Then Abe explains the
A-to-B causal loop side-effect: The vertices are
where the lines begin and end. The vertices are
being represented by Line A and Line B. While
inside the device where both lines meet, two or
more particles that happen to be at the same point
in space at the same time are allowed to go both
forward and backward in time. To further explain,
if a subject is placed inside Line A’s active
magnetic field, it exits to Line B as the magnetic
field in Line B deactivates. Subsequently,
as Line B’s magnetic field activates, the subject
immediately exits to Line A as it deactivates its
magnetic field, overlapping the present time
in Line B — thus creating a Time Machine.
Feeling excited about their discovery, they
think of registering for copyright and publish
their device. However, Aaron thinks of a
better plan but it needs a bigger model
that could fit a person in. His plan is to
determine the flow of the stock market in
the present time and use the invention to go
back in the past, invest in winning stocks,
and earn big in the stock market as they
converge back into their own timeline.
Indulged by the idea, Abe begins to refine his
proof-of-concept as he builds a larger model for
the both of them as they address each issue they
could possibly encounter during the timewarp.
After days of modification, they finally move
their base operation into a self-storage unit.
After checking all the preparations
ready, they begin their first attempt.
After traveling six hours into the
past, though the attempt was successful,
they sit to contemplate on their
experience. Then they devise an
intricate plan for their big break
as Abe explains the proceedings.
On the day, they first secure both of their cars,
one at the facility for their doubles to use,
and the other, parked outside from their
double’s line of sight for them, the originals,
to use when they return. They then step inside the
device and travel another six hours into the past.
As they get themselves into the warp, they set
their timers to determine the exact time for them
to intervene. They stay isolated in a hotel for a
few hours, so as not to interact or interfere with
the outside world while their doubles are doing
their usual routine. As the time finally arrives,
they start buying stocks from the highest margin
and they are able to succeed on their first day.
Then Abe and Aaron repeat the six-hour time warp
multiple times over multiple days, earning big
profits in stock trades with the help of their
future foresight of the market's performance.
After multiple attempts, the time travel is
already taxing on Abe and Aaron's bodies,
as the two of them begin to notice
alarming side effects that take the
form of progressive worsening of penmanship
and ear bleeding. Then one day, as a result of
their inability to cope with the power of the
technological advancement they have in hand,
they question each other about the odds of their
sense of morality. The idea has been spoken,
and the words wouldn’t go back after they utter
it aloud. Realizing that there is no real need
for it and no possible real-world application,
they confirm that there is no real advantage to
gain from it — so the idea of immorality stays,
breaking down Abe and Aaron's close relationship.
As days pass, their suspicions grow against
each other, whether or not one of them might
have leaked their biggest secret to someone. The
tension between the two men comes to a head when
Abe decides to pick a losing investment in
the stock market without Aaron’s knowledge.
Abe explains that they need to fail to avoid
suspicions, but Aaron is seemingly overly
frustrated to understand Abe’s better judgment.
Later that night, their dispute is reinforced
after an encounter with Thomas Granger, who
appears inexplicably two to three days unshaven
that is in overlap with his original self. Aaron
then tells Abe that he saw Granger earlier in
the day, clean-shaven, getting ready to attend a
function with his wife. Aaron theorizes that, at
some unknown point in the future, Granger entered
the device with timeline-altering consequences.
The permutations are endless. From this,
they deduce that the problem is recursive,
but beyond that, they find themselves
admitting, defying against the course of nature.
Guilty of the alterations of the
events, Abe goes to the storage room;
but somehow advances two more rooms from where
their time machine is stored and opens another
storage room containing another device that he
calls “The Fail-Safe Device.” Then he travels
into the past, going back four days before
the invention of their time-traveling machine.
Cumulative competing interference
wreaks havoc upon the timeline.
Future-Abe sedates Original-Abe so he will never
conduct the initial time travel experiment.
Then Future-Abe goes back to where he approaches
Original-Aaron who is sitting on a bench at the
park as he takes notes in his notebook. This
time, he intends to dissuade Original-Aaron,
but instead, he finds Future-Aaron
who has arrived in the scene first,
listening to the pre-recordings of their past
conversations on his unobtrusive earpiece.
As Future-Aaron expresses his intent to stop him
about his plans to sabotage the first creation
of the time-travel device, Future-Abe faints at
his revelation, overcome by shock and fatigue.
Future-Abe wakes up. The two men briefly and
tentatively reconcile while they jointly travel
back in time, experiencing and reshaping an
event where Abe's girlfriend Rachel Garner
was nearly killed by a gun-wielding party
crasher. After many repetitions, now ever
sufficient with knowledge of the party's events,
Aaron stops the gunman and becomes a local hero.
After the successful alteration, Aaron
considers a new life in foreign countries
where he can tamper more broadly
on the timelines for personal gain,
while Abe states his intent to remain in
town and try to sabotage their original
experiment — Abe and Aaron ultimately part ways.
As Future-Abe watches over Original-Abe,
going to painstaking extremes to keep him unaware
of the future, Future-Aaron on the other hand
shares his knowledge with Original-Aaron
by telling the story of two meticulous,
methodical, educated yet ambiguous friends who
accidentally discover a scientific breakthrough
that is still unknown — or perhaps not
yet revealed to man, on a voice recorder.
In conclusion, As both Abe and Aaron are
scientifically accomplished engineers,
they are equally morally and ethically a failure
as men. When humanity’s greed takes over, even by
benefiting the greatest gift one can receive, they
nonetheless become blindsided by it. — Thinking
only for one’s personal gain, neglecting
the morality of altering one’s former self.